### Is this data reliable?
This data accurately reflects the raw reporting that has been provided to the HHS Protect database. Before going into the HHS Protect database, this reporting data is modified only to correct obvious errors. For instance, if a hospital has been reporting that they have 10 available and staffed ICU beds for months, and then, suddenly are reporting that they have 23456789 beds, this value is reset to 10, based on the presumption that this was an accidental data entry error on the part of hospital personnel. Data correction efforts typically involve contacting the reporting hospital and ensuring that data fixes are in fact correct. 


Beyond these data corrections, it is improbable that modifications or censoring of the contents of the underlying data has occurred. These facility-level data reports have been aggregated and filtered only and precisely as described in the data documentation for the data. Outside beta-testers of the data have confirmed that previous data releases from HHS Protect line up with other publically available data sources, including those from states and other national resources available from CMS and the CDC. There is a history of cruft and other problems with the various data releases, but a careful examination of the slowly improving data releases makes it clear that the data has not been modified to fit any particular perspective or agenda about the COVID-19 crisis.  This is not to say that this data release or other releases are perfectly correct, but it does appear that these data releases are good-faith efforts to release accurate data.


Which in turn leads to its own issues. If hospital personnel accidentally type in that they have ‘11’ ICU beds, where in fact they only have 10, then this error might not be caught or corrected. It is also possible that hospitals will seek to amend their reports at a later time, based on improved information. The goal is to have a perfectly accurate daily reporting of dozens of complex values from thousands of facilities across the country. This is a lofty goal indeed. For each hospital report, hundreds of people are directly or indirectly involved, at the hospitals, state agencies, as well as Federal employees, and contractors. In many cases, these people have been working for months with no weekends or breaks. Some of them are basically either working on this or sleeping. At the hospital, especially at smaller facilities, personnel might be making the decision between working on reporting obligations and patient care. As more and more of the reporting process becomes automated and those automations are made fully reliable, the workload of individuals along the hospital reporting data pipeline has been reduced, and the quality of the underlying data is continuously improving. This is evidenced in the [graph of hospital reporting rates](https://healthdata.gov/covid-19-hospital-reporting-hospital-reporting-trend-dashboard) which shows more and more reporting fields being correctly reported every day by hospitals across the country. 


It is critical to remain empathetic with the front-line hospitals who are responsible for entering this data. They do so under very potentially stressful circumstances and the reporting is most important, exactly when things are most difficult at the hospital. Also, when HHS has made fields optional for hospitals (i.e. influenza reporting etc) not hospital should be criticized for not reporting that information. Rather, hospitals that do report this information should be celebrated. 


The data release is not perfect, and expectations that the resulting data will be perfect are not reasonable. The right answer to the question “is the data reliable?” is not yes or no. The data has been reliable enough to be used in Federal response planning for some time and continues to improve each day. The reporting consistency is high enough now that the data is likely to become reliable enough for broad release to the public for dozens of purposes. 


Expect restatements. Given that hospitals will update past reporting to HHS, HHS will update the data with some kind of restatements. This will maintain transparency as to how reporting data capture changes over time. 


